---

layout: index

title: Eight tonnes of aterial footprint - making sustainable lifestyles reality

date: 2015-09-12

---

# Sustainable Design

## Lecture of Michael Lettenmeier

### Profile

Germany to Finland

D-mat ltd.

Consulting, training, research, projects

Resource-efficiency, sustainable lifecycles, material footprint

companies, authorities, universities, research institutes, NGOs.

#### contact info

michael@d-mat.fi

www.d-mat.fi

### Objectives

1. challenge of ststainable
2. material footprint
3. one planet lifestyles
4. one planet design

### 3 basic ideas

1. one-planet resource use: make more out of less
2. material footprint: life-cycle-wide material input
3. making lifestyles sustainable

### starting exercise



### What happened the 13th August 2015

***EARTH OVER SHOOT DAY***

### How to achieve sustainability

"Industrialized" countries consumes more resources than "Developing countries", but this is changing now, weights are shifting to "Developing countries".

Halfing global resource consumption, doubling global welfare can better leading us to resource productivity.


### Trends since 1980: 1980 - 2008

1. material intensity -20%
2. population +50%
3. material use +80%
4. GDP +125%


### Metal consumption and reserves

Source: Dr.Halada, National Institute of Material Science, Japan

### Era of abundance has gone

### Rising raw-material prices: reuters commodity cash index

source: www.mrci.com

### Resource productivity

#### more out of less

more benefits

#### How much more out of how much less

Factor 4: +3% p.a. increase in eco-efficiency
Factor 10: +5% p.a. increase in eco-efficiency
Factory 8: 30 years update of the limites to growth: +4% p.a. increase in eco-efficiency


#### Dematerialisation, decoupling, degrowth

level of contribution from design(er)s can impacts Factor 10. Quality of life against amount of natural material uses.

#### Dematerialisation on product level

##### Panasonic:

##### 27 Finnish househols: Factor 9 difference in resource consumption

Summary of the ecological rucksacks of the studied households

1. none of the 27 studied households has achieved sustainable level.

#### More from less: you cannot manage what you cannot quantity

#### Hidden material flows in the life cycle of products

gold production
...

#### Consequences of present resource use

1. conflicts worldwide in the past 5 years
2. total renewable water resources
3. source: UN ..
4. global warming trends, syria's climate conflict
5. **miten salpausselät syntyivät** by risto isomäki

### Life Cycle Thinking

for example:
product waste vrs. life-cycle waste
use phase emissions vrs. mining waste
biofuels: production vrs. use phase emissions
packaging vrs. product

#### Input and output: what to quantify

##### Input
resources: materials, water, air, soil

##### production and consumption

##### output
water, CO2, air emissions, chemicals, etc.

##### impact
biodiv, los, eutrophication, climate change, ozone depletion, etc.

#### common knowledge base:
carbon footprint
life cycle assessment
ecological footprint
water backpack, water footprint,
MIPS, ecological footprint

#### MIPS: measuring resource efficiency

material input against service unit

##### Material input (MI)

life cycle wide natural

Composition of the material footprint

#### Material footprnt: holistic indicator

holistic, though rough indicator
illustrative indicators against particular environmental issues/problems

#### 5 categories of resources

abiotic resources (≈ nonn-renewable)
biotic resources (≈ nonn-renewable)
top soil
water
air

##### Material input of products

##### MIT factors of electric power

#### Decreasing MI = more out of less

#### Service unit (S): more out of less

##### How to increase the service-unit

**increasing longevity**
1. durability
2. repairability
3. maintainability
4. upgrading
5. resusability
6. etc.

##### Refrigerator production and use in Germany: material footprint

#### Products are only service-delivering machines

1. the consumer needs only or mainly the service
2. possibility to use the products (services) is enough. e.g. library, laundry...

#### From thinking in products to thinking in services

1. what the consumer needs is the service the product is providing

##### Business from products to services

1. selling office space use instead of the building (YIT)
2. selling good room-air quality instead of air-conditioning devices (Ender GmbH)
3. selling flexible mobility instead of cars (City Car Club, CAR2GO)
4. selling office furnishing service instead of furniture (ISKU)
5. selling communication solutions instead of devices (SONERA)

### Answer to the following questions

make notes of your points

1. what the size of your home? 20 -30 m2 per persion **4p**
2. how do you use electric power? I haven't paid attention to the electricity production **8p**
3. how many km/week you drive alone by car? 0 km **0p**
4. how many km/week do you go by car together with others? **0p**
5. how often do you eat meat products? every day **8p**

### Summary

[whole test](http://www.sustainable-lifestyles.eu/conference/conference-snapshots.html)

[more detailed test in German](www.ressourcen-rechner.de)

#### Material footprint of household consumption

40 tonnes per person in a year.

#### FIN-MIPS households

##### results on more detailed lifestyle level

a vegetarian lifestyle does not necessarily result in a lower resource consumption

##### mobility

a public transport-based mobility pattern does not necessarily result in a lower resource consumption

#### household income and resource use

the relation between TMR and gross income

#### material foot print of low-income households

##### the limits of sufficiency

18 Finnish low-income households: 6...30 tonnes/cap./a

### How to achieve sustainable level?

#### one of the biggest lifestyle changes we know

current material footprint of the average brazilian: 11.4 ton/cap/a.

### Material input

= amount of consumption x material intensity

#### Food: from 6 to 3 tonnes
