---
layout: index

title: Day 1 - Environmental Management

date: 2016-02-16
---

# General talk - by Paul Carroll

  1. Pre-course tasks
  2. Time schedules
  3. Course introduction

# Prioritising the Environment - by Dr Caroline Gallagher

Lecturer from Glasgow Caledonion University

## Outline

  1. Global converns
    common awareness
  2. Drivers of compliance
    why should we do something?
  3. Health and safety vs. the Environment
    can we link both together, and how?
  4. Prioritising the environment

## Drivers of Change

  1. climate change
  2. greenhouse gases
    should scotland build more wind fans? tourism vs environmental protection
  3. urbanisation
  4. one billion people living in extreme poverty
  5. income inequality
  6. unsustainable consumption and production

## A quote from Al Gore

  Each passing day ....

## Sustainability

  A quote from Kofi Annan, United Nations March 2001

    Our biggest challenge in this century is to take an idea that seems abstract - sustainable development - and turn it into a reality for all the world's people.

  But, leagal requirements are the minimum standards required.

      e.g. problem between UK and scotland

## Drivers of compliance

  1. government/europe
  2. insurance industry
  3. media/public perception

## Environmental protection

  1. **single european act 1986 - articles 130 r-t**
  2. Policies
    a. to preserve, protect and improve the quality of the environment
    b. to contribute towards the protection of human health, and
    c. to ensure prudent and rational utilisation of natural resources
  3. Actions
    a. preventative action should be taken
    b. environmental damage should be rectified at source
    c. the polluter should pay.

## Health and safety vs the environment

  1. health and safety is considered to be successful, why?
    a. duty of care
    b. self involvement
    c. well established
    d. relevant
    e. criminal punishment
  2. environmental issues do not have the same level of priority, why?
    a. a poor 'cousin' to health and safety
    b. can be the first causality when trying to cut costs and save money
    c. not so well established (more frequent changes)
    d. self involvement
    e. severity penalties

## What tools can we use?

  1. environmental management systems [EMS EMAS ISO14001]
  2. environmental impact assessment [EIA]
  3. life cycle analysis [LCA]
  4. ..

## What should be done?

  1. closer integration of environmental legislation with health and safety？
  2. ...

## Is the environment prioritised?

  1. do we have a 'duty of care'?
  2. how important is the environment in your workplace?
  3. how important is the environment in your home?



# Flooding in Scotland and the UK

## What does flooding(in the UK) have to do with this course in environmental management?

Why should I pay attention?

## Overview

  1. why is flooding important
  2. is this an issue for Scotland
  3. what causes flooding and what are the effects in Scotland and the UK
  4. how extensive is it
  5. ...

## Effects of flooding worldwide each year

  1. 13,000 people killed
  2. 30 million people made homeless
  3. affects 60 million people
  4. cost $40 billion
  5. what about the other effects
    a. health, wellbeing, stress
    b. can last for years

## Scotlands approachs to handle flooding


------------------------------

# Environmental management: From Sustainability to responsibility –a historical perspective

## Outline

  1. early days & pre-history
  2. Europe: Germany, England, France
  3. Environmentalism and other movements
  4. The USA and birth of environmentalism

## Easter Island

## Etymology - the origins of words


-----------------------------

# Environmental legislation and its main features - by Eeva Aarrevaara
