---
title: Societal Changes & Future Foresights - Day 1
layout: index
date: 2015-10-29
---

# Furture of INTERNET - BY DEMOSHELSINKI

## Today

1. what can digitalisation change?
2. end of work or liberation from work?

## what is the biggest change related to your job, what will happen in next 5 years?

### listeners' points of view:

1. we don't need to go to work, people work remotely more than ever
2. robots will take our job occupancy

### presenter's point of view:

#### 1. physical will become digital and digital will become physical.

	Examples: airbnb, uber, google.

#### 2. Information is power.

	more and more information and data avaliable.

	the one who controls it has more power.

	example: amazon (AWS)

#### 3. You won't need to own a thing

objects are more and more self-aware, which enables "as a sevice" models. customer doesn't need to own an object but just pay to access the service.

#### 4. Objects are able to harvest their own energy

all things are able to harvest their own energy, which decreases the path dependencies.

## what is the biggest change in our society in next 10 years?

### listeners' point of view:

1. a lot of uses of paper.
2. reducing of health care and other welfare benefits3. .
3. model in Estonia will be applied in Finland too.
4. shared economies.
5. visulisation and Internet media
6. resouces occupation

### presenter's view:

End of work or libration from work.

USGS earthquake notification service issue.

OUT of work.

comparison of marriott and airbnb:

revenue: $23b vs $20b

employee: 120000 vs 1600

kodak against instagram:

$28b vs $28b

140000 vs 13


higher education becomes less important

jobs make us to belong to the society

lots of wicked problems, and solutions for them vary.

people can work without a job. people doesn't need a workplace to do work.


core things in future:

1. capacity to solve different problem
2. interest towards the world.

future requests:

1. ability to see the alternative
2. new skills: skill to work with machines, system thinking, make own skills useful
3. curiosity: to understand global problems
4. empathy and interaction

## What is the most important wicked problem related to your skills?

### listeners' view:

1. Finnish language
2. money
3. time

## how to contribute to solve the problem chosen

### pair discussion:

1. instance memory injection for information
2. access control on what information to be injected



---------


# MAKING FUTURES - FUTURES STUDIES TACKLING WICKED PROBLEMS - KRISTIINA SOINI-SALOMAA

## Nine key assumptions

1. time
2. new things
3. decisions
4. ...

## Six pillars in future thinking and strategy transformation

1. mapping present and future
2. anticipating future
3. timing future
4. deepening the future
5. alternatives to present
6. transforming present and creating future

### cycles and change

future development can be predicted half time of the past

### trends

Kondratieff's theory

drivers in our wave (2010-2050):

1. intelligent technologies

## Futures studies

1. futures research
2. futures education
3. action for futures

## Knowledge interests in research

## Futures reserch methodology

done by the millennium project

## Futures research approaches

1. sufficiently certain future
2. range of futures
3. alternative futures
4. genuine uncertainty

## Delphi

## Critical future researches

### Arguments of critical futures thinking

### CLA: causal layered analysis

1. Weak signals
2. wild cards, black swans

signals > trends > megatrends

### Future awarenes - making futures

1. track urgent futures
2. identify new value flows
3. prototype the future

scanning for weak signals > sense making > probing and acting



------------------------------------


# Innovation - Leema Eloranta

## The need for innovation

challenge of changes:

1. stay ahead of competition and survive
2. unknown
3. ..

## Definitions

1. incremental and radical
2. product, service, management, market, business model, process
3. open innovations
4. social innovations

## Thinking out of the box

order of the following numbers:

8, 5, 4, 9, 1, 7, 6, 10, 3, 2

alphabetical

Things in the sixth wave:

1. ecologic problems, green tech
2. efficient use of resources
3. health care
4. biology..
5. smart cities

## IoT

The Internet of Things

## Organisational culture

culture eats strategy for a lunch

### main characteristics of innovation culture

1. uncertainty and unknown acceptance.
2. risk taking
3. tolerance for conflicts
4. ...

---------------------------------

# Future trends in social and health care - Juha Roslakka

## The welfare state/society

## The historical process of Finnish welfare state

1. modern society
2. social democracy
3. strong state
4. strong woman

### Great depression of the 1990s: the turning point of Finnish welfare and its consequences


## current and future trends of social and health care in Finland: megatrends
